Referee 
Report 
MS# 
9207 
Do 
Constraints 
on 
Market 
Work 
Hours 
Change 
Home 
Production 
Efforts? 


1 
Overview 


This paper examines the effects of market hours constraints on time spent in home 
production and leisure. The paper examines both upside constraints (where workers
 would like to work more hours, but can not) as well as downside constraints 
(where workers would like to work fewer hours, but can not. The model shows that 
home production hours with an upside market hours constraint is unambiguously 
larger compared to the case where market hours constraints are non-binding. The 
reverse is true for downside constraints. The effect on leisure hours is ambiguous, 
depending on whether home work hours increase more or less than the reduction 
in market hours due, say, to an upside constraint. The findings of the econometric 
exercise indicate home production hours fall under upside market constraints but 
are essentially unaffected for downside constraints. 

2 
Comments 


1. While the model is fairly standard for a representative agent, it should specify
 more clearly what an “agent” is. The model appears to be written for an 
“individual,” however, much of the empirical framework considers single 
and married households. If the paper were written where the agent is considered
 to be a household, I would expect different modeling choices. For 
example, how are husband and wife hours combined to produce the home 
good? Are husband and wife hours of leisure complements or substitutes? 
This should be more carefully explained and modeled. 
2. The two numerical examples do not add much to the paper and should be 
deleted. 
3. It is difficult to believe–and worrisome–that 25% of the sample heads of 
married households in the PSID have zero hours of home work. I think 
it would be useful to go to a source of better time use data, such as the 
American Time Use Survey to see the fraction of zero hours reported there. 
1 



As it stands, the data from the PSID seem to not be very reliable for this 
exercise. 

4. The vacation time analysis does not seem appropriate in the current context, 
i.e., in terms of home hours of work. It is not at all clear to me that vacation 
time is necessarily leisure. Taking vacation days from work could be used to 
do home production. A similar point can be made concerning the food-out 
ratio. Eating out less may not have much of an effect if households switch 
to microwave meals. Or, they could be eating at better or worse restaurants, 
changing expenditure but not changing home hours. 
5. The econometric strategy should try to exploit more of the panel structure 
in the PSID. There is a dummy variable reported in table 4 for being upside 
constrained and one dummy variable for being downside constrained. Is 
it equal to one if a household is constrained in any period? Is there any 
dummy variable if the household changed constraint status? In theory, we 
would like to see the effect of the constraint status of a household over time 
then, we could hope to estimate “...how much the market hours constraints 
would make workers change their housework hours” (page 15). 
6. Page 9. The questions that classify a worker as upside constrained or downside 
constrained (and the data in general) seem to ignore the difference between 
salaried and hourly workers. What does it mean for a salaried worker 
to be hours constrained? Not until the very end of the paper is this difference 
acknowledged in one line. It is never clear if this difference is explicit 
in the data. Are hourly wages computed for salaried workers and that hourly 
wage used in this paper? 
3 
Minor 
Comments 


1. page 7: should be “casually” not “causally”. 
2. page 11: The author says that PSID wife hours are generally much lower 
than those in the HRS data, possibly due to the increase in womens labor 
force participation over the last decade. Why wouldnt one expect the exact 
opposite? It seems like older women in the HRS would be more likely to 
have come from a generation that didnt work outside the home as much 
and younger women in the PSID would be more likely to participate in the 
market labor force. 
2 



3. In some places insignificant results are taken as evidence for the eect so long 
as they have the expected sign, but when they do not, the author downplays 
their importance because they are insignificant, see page 15, paragraph 1. 
4. In section 4.2 on page 11, the author uses the positive correlation between 
head and wifes UCs as evidence for changes in household preferences. It is 
stated that this could not be from changes of the employer since that would 
usually only aect one individual. However, during this time period 19701975 
there was a recession in the economy which may have been limiting 
the amount of hours and the wages of workers. This could be the true cause 
of the UCs, not preferences. 
3 



