Do constraints on market work hours change home production efforts? 

by Geng Li 

Summary 

The study empirically analyses whether workers that face market work constraints spend a 
different amount of hours on housework than workers that do not feel constrained. For the 
analysis, data for 1968-1986 from the PSID is used, as well as HRS data for 1992-2006. Survey 
information determines whether workers are upward constrained (work less than they desire) or 
downward constrained (work more than they desire). Information about yearly working hours 
and yearly hours of housework is available. 
The analysis starts with a small stylized model to gain theoretical insights. As outcomes it is 
found that upward constrained workers do not spend the entire deficit of market work with home 
production, but also increase leisure, and the downward constrained do allocate their lack of 
nonmarket time not only to a reduction in housework but also to a reduction in leisure. 
Regressions are run for three outcome variables: housework time, food-out ratios (ratio food 
expenditures eating out versus total food expenditures, including home produced food), and 
vacation time (=time off work). Dummy indicators for being upward constrained and downward 
constrained are included among a range of other regressors, like race, education, income, wage 
rates, age marital status, and children by age. Regressions (both linear and pooled) are run for 
pooled data (basically identifying the dummies for constraints by comparing constrained workers 
with unconstrained workers) and fixed and random effects specification (which also take into 
account changes in constraint status within households over time). 
The results show that the upward constrained workers spend more time on housework than the 
unconstrained workers (the effects get smaller but remain once controlled for random or fixed 
effects), their food-out ratio is lower, whereas effect on vacation time is ambiguous, depending 
on marital status and the inclusion of fixed or random effects (it gets positive in the latter case). 
For downward constrained workers we see no differences with the unconstrained (only the 
married spouses seem to spend more time on housework, an effect that disappears once fixed 
effects are controlled for), also no effects on food-out time and vacation. 

Comments 

The theoretical issue is based on comparing the same worker in the situation he is constrained 
and in the situation he is not. If we consider the adding up constraint for time, and assume that 
total time is the aggregate of work time, housework time, and leisure, then if someone who 
works less than desired, the sum of housework time and leisure is larger than desired. Then the 
question is: is it housework time that is larger than in the desired situation, is it leisure time, both, 
or could it even be possible that one of them is smaller than in the desired situation? Someone 
feeling upward constrained has a high valuation of consumption relative to the valuation of 
leisure, in a situation where utility is derived from consumption and leisure only. 

1 



To increase consumption if income is not sufficient due to working hours constraints, he can 
‘produce’ consumption at home, so it is likely that he will spend more time on housework 
compared to the situation he could work his desired amount of market hours. Without further 
assumptions, the amount of leisure could even be smaller for the upward constrained worker than 
for the unconstrained worker, but the stylized theoretical model predicts that leisure will be 
larger as well. What also matters for the quantitative outcome is how much weight the worker 
attaches to consumption relative to leisure: what is the shape of the marginal utility functions? In 
other words, are the upward constrained workers more income constrained or are they more like 
workaholics? So far I have started my comments by writing down some intuitive economic 
arguments about the problem, because that is what I am missing in the exposition of this paper. 
Theoretical predictions are in this paper very much based on this stylized model, but without this 
model we can come very far. I am missing the story behind the model, telling us what which 
economic mechanisms play a role here. 
Next, an explanation about the origin of constraints on market hours is missing. It seems as if the 
constraints are exogenously imposed. But even for two workers facing the same labor market 
environment, the one may feel constrained, while the other does not. Being constrained is a 
mixture of restrictions stemming from the demand side of the labor market, someone’s abilities 
(determining productivity and wages), and someone’s own mix of preferences for consumption 
and leisure. That means that heterogeneity of workers and selectivity issues play a potentially 
very important role. In that light it is questionable whether it makes much sense (from an 
empirical point of view) to present a theoretical model analysis that compares the same worker in 
the situation where he is constrained and where he is unconstrained. Also, it is questionable 
whether we can address the issue empirically simply by including a dummy variable for being 
constrained as a regressor in the analysis. 
My detailed comments follow. 

1. 
In section 3 a simple and quite restrictive model is chosen to derive some theoretical 
predictions. I am certainly not against using simple and restrictive models for this 
purpose, as we usually can gain many insights from such analysis. But it is very 
important to discuss how the model restricts behavior and in which direction outcomes 
are affected if alternatives are chosen. Equation (1) assumes that market consumption 
goods can always, in a more or less perfect way, be substituted by home produced goods. 
It precludes, for instance, that home produced goods are inferior and market goods are 
normal (as, for instance, could be the case for cleaning jobs) or the other way around (as, 
for instance, in the case of childcare). Utility function (2) precludes complementarity of 
consumption goods and leisure as the marginal utility of consumption does not depend on 
leisure. It also precludes that some housework production time may generate utility by 
itself (positively or negatively). Equation (1) precludes that some market goods can 
simply not be produced at home, or workers lack the skills for home production. The 
issues mentioned here are not just academic details, but will affect the behavioral 
outcomes. 
2 



2. 
Throughout it is ignored that someone who is downward restricted also have the choice to 
quit. 
3. 
The whole analysis from the second half page 6 on through the end of section 3 is 
unnecessarily complicated and therefore redundant. We can interpret the equation (1) as a 
production function for the composite consumption good C, which, after substituting for 
CM = N and CH = g(H ) shows how C can be generated with market time inputs N and 
household time H (as shown in equation (4)). Since the function g is concave, N has a 
linear marginal effect before it is raised to the power . 
whereas the marginal effect of H 
is always decreasing. In the unconstrained case, by (5) and (6) marginal effects on utility 
are equal. If, from that point on, we decrease N (to show the effects of upward 
constraints), increasing H by the same amount cannot recover the consumption level. The 
lower productivity of H makes it less attractive to use it and the increase in H will be 
smaller than the decrease in N. As a consequence, leisure will increase. Only if N and H 
are perfect substitutes ( r = 1,a = 0.5 ) we get 1 on 1 replacement of market time by 

housework time and leisure not change (this latter result is implicitly also addressed by 
the author, just below equation (12), in a much less concise way. Two conclusions: 1). 
The exposition can be simplified a lot; 2). The ‘qualitative’ theoretical conclusion by the 
author very much depend on the functional form assumption (1). 

4. 
Nowadays the household production model is often considered an important framework 
for the simultaneous analysis of time choices of spouses. Therefore it is somewhat 
disappointing that the analysis in this paper is done on individual basis only. In the 
empirical specifications, spouses’ variables are exogenously added, whereas the 
theoretical exposition does not address the spouses’ impacts. I can understand that data 
limitations play a role here, but nevertheless it limits the scope of the analysis. 
5. 
Page 11, half way: “The changes occurred … the same employer”. That needs not be 
true. If the head becomes upside constrained, the wife may want to work more to increase 
household income, and at that point she may discover herself constrained as well, even if 
she works for a different employer. 
6. 
Section 5, the econometrics. For being upside and downside constrained, dummy 
variables UC and DC are included at the right hand side. But doing this assumes that first 
there is an exogenous constraint and next on the basis of that the number of housework 
hours is chosen. In fact, the worker solves his time allocation problem, including the 
determination of market hours, housework hours, and leisure, and comparing the outcome 
with the available working hours determines whether he is constrained or not. Being 
constrained or not largely depends on the same parameters as the choice of housework 
hours. Therefore, equations (16) and (17) cannot be interpreted as structural economic 
equations and the parameter estimates of UC and DC do not measure causal effects of 
these variables. The mechanism explaining how UC and DC are determined is not 
modeled here whereas in fact they are endogenous. See, for instance, Stewart and 
3 



Swaffield (1997, EJ) or Bloemen (2008, JOLE) for approaches that econometrically 
incorporate the constraints. 

7. 
It is striking that the author, for the ‘more quantitative analysis’ uses different and 
additional underlying regression approaches than before. Is this an implicit recognition 
that the earlier approach is not sufficient? 
8. 
The variable income is included in the regressions. This probably also includes earnings, 
which, for given wage rates, are higher the higher are working hours, so the variable is 
potentially endogenous as well. 
9. 
In the theoretical model, the wage rate was normalized to one. In labor supply theory, the 
wage rate plays an important role in determining the desired working hours, and therefore 
in determining whether someone is constrained. Search theory suggests that workers have 
higher reservation wages for jobs with hours further away from the desired level. 
10. In table 2 we see that the summary statistics of the downside constrained are much more 
similar to those of the not constrained than the upside constrained. We also find that 
result back in the regressions: being downside constrained hardly matters for the outcome 
variables, whereas being upside constrained does. This, together with the earlier doubts 
about the causal interpretation of the regression equations, makes me wonder how far the 
results are driven by heterogeneity between the upside constrained at the one hand and 
the other groups at the other hand. Apparently there are observed characteristics that 
determine selection into the state of being upside constrained. This selection process, 
though, is not modeled here, as has already been mentioned before. 
4 



